Making an iOS Zwift Clone to Save $15 a Month! Part 2: Reverse Engineering a Workout
Published on April 07, 2019.
Last time, on “Making an iOS Zwift Clone to Save $15 a Month” I wrote about
learning Core Bluetooth to connect to my exercise bike and get data streaming
directly to my app.
Since writing that article, I cleaned up the implementation of the Core
Bluetooth service a bit and started supporting some additional data like
distance, calories burned and cycling cadence.
While cycling on my exercise bike and staring at these numbers is fun, the
built-in screen on my bike already shows these numbers, so I essentially
recreated a subset of the official
ergData app so far.
I realized the next challenge would be to start a guided workout in my app and
show the target wattage alongside my actual wattage on the bike.
Enter the Workout
Zwift workouts seem pretty simple to begin with.
You can set up a number of
workout segments to guide your workout.
There are warmups, steady states,
intervals, free ride sections and cool-downs.
At any given point in your
workout, Zwift will tell you to put in a certain amount of effort.
You just try
to get your watt number to match what Zwift wants you to do.
At first I figured I could come up with my own way of representing workouts, but
that would also require me to re-create all of the workouts I usually use on
Zwift. Zwift also has a nice workout editor that can use to edit preset workouts
or create completely new ones on your own.
I discovered that if you copy an existing workout to edit it, the workout will
be saved as user data and will be synced between all devices.
How is the workout
data saved, you ask?
No, not as JSON as a sane developer would use.
It’s XML. Okay, so technically it’s a .
zwo file but I know what XML looks like!
Here’s a sample of an exported workout file:
So I went ahead and implemented an XMLParser in Swift to turn .
zwo files into my
own Workout struct.
I won’t bore you with the implementation details but it was
kind of a walk down memory lane dealing with the delegation-based API of
XMLParser. I’m surprised there isn’t a more modern solution in Foundation but
I’m guessing it’s because most people have moved on from XML.
Let’s Reverse Engineering
By reading the .
zwo files, I was able to figure out how Zwift represents their
workouts and basically reverse engineer the structure of a workout:
There are also some other things like text captions that appear during a
workout, free ride segments and cadence settings that I didn’t bother to
implement because I don’t use them.
The cadence stuff makes sense if you’re
using a smart trainer but my bike doesn’t support automatically changing resistance anyway.
I decided to represent the WorkoutSegment as a Swift enum since it needs to
support a bunch of different formats with varying levels of complexity.
I’m actually kinda curious how the Zwift team ended up representing these and if
they did something similar.
From here it’s pretty simple to get stuff like the total duration or the target
wattage for a particular time offset, whether I need to calculate that (in the
case of a warmup or cooldown) or if I just return the constant value.
Aside from representing the workout segments, the actual workout object will
consist of things like the name, description, FTP and other information that
pertains to the state of the workout like time elapsed.
I wrote a function that
takes the current time elapsed in the workout, loops through and finds the
corresponding segment and returns the desired wattage.
There might be a more
efficient way to do that but for now it works.
I also added some things to my project for displaying and choosing workouts from
a list, and actually displaying the target wattage alongside actual wattage.
I want to improve the interface now since it’s terrible, but I’ll save that for
another blog post.
If you want to check out the project, it’s all here on
Github, including the playgrounds I used
to test out the workout segment logic before adding it to the Xcode project.
Next on my list of tasks is to make the workout interface a lot prettier/usable,
and to add heart rate information from my Apple Watch.